BREAKING - NOT CORRECT

Yellow-and-blue continues overhaul with Brazilian Faverani

Only four players from last season are guaranteed to be back for 2015/16, with Yogev Ohayon, Devin Smith, Sylven Landesberg and Guy Pnini all under contract

Gal Mekel 
Israeli national team guard Gal Mekel . (photo credit:SASHA MATIC)

Share on Facebook  Share on Twitter

Brazilian center Vitor Faverani became the fifth and latest player to join the revolution at Maccabi Tel Aviv on Friday, signing a one-year contract with an option for a second year.

Faverani played for the Boston Celtics in 2013/14, averaging 4.4 points and 3.5 rebounds over 37 games. In March 2014, he was sidelined following surgery for a torn lateral meniscus in his left knee, and he hasn’t played a game since. Maccabi gave Faverani a thorough medical last week and offered him a deal after being pleased with the results.

“Vitor is very hungry after a year and a half without a game due to injury,” said Maccabi head coach Guy Goodes. “He likes to play with his back to the basket and can also score from distance. He is very determined and motivated to show that he belongs in the highest level in Europe.”

Faverani joins Jordan Farmar, Taylor Rochestie, Trevor Mbakwe and Dagan Yivzori, who have all signed for the club since its shock exit in the BSl semifinals last month.

Only four players from last season are guaranteed to be back for 2015/16, with Yogev Ohayon, Devin Smith, Sylven Landesberg and Guy Pnini all under contract. Maccabi is also still hoping to bring back Brian Randle, despite allowing him to test free agency.

One player who will not be joining Maccabi is Gal Mekel. “Despite the desire of Maccabi and Gal Mekel to reach an agreement, it was decided to cease negotiations due to incompatibility with the timetables of both parties,” a Maccabi statement read.

Maccabi’s announcement boosted Hapoel Jerusalem’s hopes of landing Mekel, although the guard is still determined to exhaust every option in the n B a and also has lucrative offers from Europe.

Jerusalem is also hoping to sign Israel national team forward Elishay Kadir, but Hapoel Eilat still believes it can retain his ser vices.

Eilat, which lost to Jerusalem in the BS l final after knocking out Maccabi, made its first signing of the summer on Friday, reach ing an agreement with Shlomi Harush, who left Hapoel Holon. Harush averaged 9.3 points, 3.0 rebounds and 2.1 assists last season and will help strengthen Eilat’s Israeli core, which includes Afik Nissim and Amit Simhon, as well as Kadir.

Hapoel Tel Aviv announced the signing of Gil Amity from Ironi Ness Ziona on Friday, while also extending the contract of captain Matan Naor. The 34-year-old will be entering his ninth season at Hapoel.

“ i ’m happy to be continuing at my home with my red family,” said Naor.

Maccabi Haifa signed shooting guard Kenny Bellinger II to a three-year deal on Friday, making him its first-ever call up from Haifa’s official developmental team affiliate the Miami Midnites of the a B a .

“We had the opportunity to see Kenny in Miami and were impressed with his shooting ability, defense, and intensity,” said Haifa head coach Rami Hadar. “We see Kenny as a prospect with potential, who started to develop at the Miami Midnites and will continue to do so at Maccabi Haifa.”